{:layout :post
 :title "Laptops are the Stenotypes of Software Engineers"
 :date "2013-02-17 00:00:00"}

Increasingly, I've been asked variants on the question "what will
happen to desktops/laptops," particularly in light of the
proliferation of smartphones and tablets.  This has resulted in
several good conversations, and I've begun to use the following
analogy when discussing this with colleagues in non-engineering
disciplines:

Laptop computers will become the stenotypes of software engineers.

The [stenotype][1] is a niche device used by stenographers (most
prominently, court reporters) to transcribe dialog in real-time at
blindingly-fast words-per-minute rates.  Fellow Emacs users might
appreciate how the stenotype works: instead of typing single letters,
multiple keys are "chorded" together to allow many more combinations
with many fewer keys.  And instead of producing single letters, many
of these combinations produce syllables or whole words.  These
physical optimizations are coupled with conventions among
stenographers to wantonly omit or abbreviate words where there is
little ambiguity of meaning, which further improves efficiency---the
fewer characters put to a page, the less chance of typos.  This leads
to the output of the stenotype being difficult to read by those who
are not well-versed in the conventions (called "theories") used by
stenographers.

One could describe the typical QWERTY keyboard as the antithesis of
the stenotype.  Designed to reduce jams in the old typewriting
systems---a constraint clearly nonexistent in modern
hardware---mainstream keyboards are considered more accessible
compared with a stenotype.  However, even considering later
iterations, such as the [Dvorak][2] layout, these keyboards cannot
hope to match the ruthless efficiency of a stenotype when used in
real-time transcription work.

Few would reach for a stenotype to write a letter to their mother
(unless she was a stenographer herself!), and no trained court
reporter would care to wonder into the courtroom with a QWERTY
keyboard.  Despite digital recorders making inroads into court
reporting and closed caption transcription, stenotypes are still
available (hint: [ebay][3]), persisting thanks to an ingrained base of
stenographers who remain ruthlessly efficient at these
highly-specialized tasks.

Which brings us back to computing.

Software engineers are not your average user.  We don't have an
average computing workload and have a completely disparate set of
tools and conventions.  Dell didn't even try to lampshade this fact
with their [Sputnik][4] Ubuntu laptop aimed squarely at developers.
And, while tablets have proven to be capable of everything from
typical computing tasks to [basic software development][5],

> If it doesn't have a keyboard, I feel that my thoughts are being
> forced out through a straw.<br />
> ---Joey Hess

The [immanent death][9] of the laptop is greatly exaggerated; after
all, the stenotype lives on to this day.  However, the fate of the
laptop *as we know it*---available in every imaginable color, style,
shape, size, and brandishing shiny logos to reinforce its reputation
as a status symbol---is less certain.  This fact was made more stark
for me when I realized that installing [Android x86][6] on my Eee PC
gave it more in common with modern computing platforms than my primary
development laptop (Thinkpad x120e with Arch Linux and the minimal
xmonad window manager).  And I know I'm not the only developer who
has, consciously or unconsciously, increased the specialization of my
desktops/laptops while using smartphones/tablets for non-work related
activities.  Who really wants to pull out and boot up a laptop for
light internet reading when you've got an instant-on smartphone or
tablet within reach?  I'm becoming more convinced that this is what
the real "death" of the laptop looks like.

For software engineers, the role of laptops (and desktops even moreso)
is slowly morphing into one similar to that of stenotypes.  It's
arguable that this is inevitable: artists don't use college-rule
paper, chemists don't conduct titrations in a coffee mug, and
firefighters don't roll up in a corolla to put out house fires.
Professions evolve better and more efficient methodology, and when
professionals outgrow the prevailing tools available to consumers,
they develop new tools.  This has already been well underway on the
software side---you won't find lawyers writing briefs with `vim`,
after all.

If consumer computing devices become more recalcitrant for software
engineers, it makes sense that a professional-grade tool should fill
in the gap.  The most natural candidate is the form factors we already
have: laptops and desktops.  But that certainly doesn't limit
innovation to current devices---a positive side effect of this "death"
of laptops is that it provides a great opportunity to rethink what
sort of device would benefit developers most, without being strictly
constrained by a 1980s design that was intended for general computing.
And this prospect may not be as far away as it might seem, given the
recent rise of [hardware startups][7].

The next time you pull out a laptop in a coffee shop, I don't
anticipate you'll get the same quizzical looks you might receive if
you brought a stenotype with you.  But, like the stenotype, I do think
that the proliferation of tablets and other more consumer-oriented
devices will necessitate a professional class of devices that are less
common and more specialized.  And in the meantime, that might mean the
stylishness of laptops will begin to wane.  I'm okay with that.

\[Incidentally, you can turn a conventional keyboard into a stenotype-like device with [Plover][8],
an open-source stenotype software package.\]

[1]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stenotype
[2]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dvorak_Simplified_Keyboard
[3]: https://www.ebay.com/sch/i.html?_trksid=p5197.m570.l1313&_nkw=stenotype&_sacat=0&_from=R40
[4]: https://content.dell.com/us/en/gen/d/campaigns/xps-linux-laptop
[5]: https://pythonforios.com/
[6]: https://www.android-x86.org/
[7]: https://www.hackthings.com/brace-yourself-here-come-the-hardware-startups/
[8]: https://stenoknight.com/wiki/Main_Page
[9]: https://www.fastcompany.com/3004563/2013-when-tablets-beat-laptops
