---
layout: page
title: about
---

Here serves as the personal website of your humble author---one
Jarrell Waggoner. Part repository and part creative outlet for my
musings. Part CV for others and part reference for myself. If you'd
like to know more about me or this page, read on. For professional
information, my [Research][1] page holds the answers.

I am a computer scientist. In training, depending on where you fall on
how many degrees it takes to be labeled a scientist. At other times
and places, I've been known as a programmer, developer, system
administrator, student, instructor, tutor, film score composer,
digital modeler/animator, image editor, video editor, film director,
graphics designer, web developer, typesetter, and writer (technical
and nontechnical), and probably other things as well. Corporeally, I
live in South Carolina. In the virtual domain, I can be found
everywhere from [Facebook][2] to [Youtube][3].

I'm known by several monikers. Strictly speaking, my name is
pronounced <img class="alignnone" title="[‘ʤɛɹәl]"
src="http://www.malloc47.com/wp-content/uploads/misc/jarrell-ipa.png"
alt="[‘ʤɛɹәl] " width="52" height="17" /> <img class="alignnone"
title="[wægәnɹ̩]"
src="http://www.malloc47.com/wp-content/uploads/misc/waggoner-ipa.png"
alt="[wægәnɹ̩]" width="64" height="16" /> (in <a class="external"
title="International Phonetic Alphabet"
href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/International_Phonetic_Alphabet">IPA</a>),
though a number of alternate approximations have arisen over the
years. I'm also known as <em>malloc47</em>, my internet handle since
the mid-'90s. Derived, quite simply, from a standard C command, <a
class="external" title="Memory ALLOCation"
href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Malloc">malloc</a>, and my favorite
number, <a class="external" title="Yup, it's prime."
href="http://www.47.net/47society/">47</a>. We have since been dragged
away from the era of obscure, anonymizing internet personas thanks to
Facebook and ilk, but I keep my old moniker around for nostalgia's
sake.

My interests are obscure and varied, though appreciation for film scores is my one pastime that has generated more useless trivia than any other. My affinity for instrumental film and television soundtracks stretches over scores from the  last half-century. In and about this site, you'll find no shortage of my admiration for, dissection of, and (occasionally) contribution to the genre. Yes, I do dabble in the composition of film scores (in a rather amateur capacity). I'll soon endeavor to have a section dedicated to my experiments. Less for propagating my existing pieces, and more as an encouragement to myself to craft more of them.

I've been working with computer systems over the last 1.5 decades, and have largely shifted to open-source for the majority of what I work with. I've run everything from small-to-even-smaller-size networks using Windows Server 200{0,3} and various flavors of <a class="external" title="Linux, Unix, etc." href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/*nix">*nix</a>. I currently manage a Linux lab using several <a class="external" href="http://www.centos.org/">CentOS</a> 5 servers and a number of <a class="external" href="http://fedoraproject.org/">Fedora</a> 6-14 workstations. For my personal network, I have a low-power <a class="external" href="http://www.globalscaletechnologies.com/p-22-sheevaplug-dev-kit-us.aspx">Sheevaplug</a>operating as my server and two workstations running the latest flavor of <a class="external" href="http://www.ubuntu.com/">Ubuntu</a>, along with an assortment of other less-powerful and more portable machines with <a class="external" href="http://www.archlinux.org/">Arch</a> and a couple of <a class="external" href="http://www.dd-wrt.com/">dd-wrt</a> powered routers. Being a command-line aficionado, I try to catalog my latest discoveries in the <a href="http://www.malloc47.com/code">code</a> section. It's actually easier than it sounds to move to open-source alternatives for everyday things like word processors (I prefer typesetting solutions such as <a class="external" href="http://www.latex-project.org/">LaTeX</a>), and I've actually assembled a <a class="external" title="Fit For Society" href="http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=l7jBdt6MVw4">movie</a> edited entirely using open-source software.

## About This Site 

I love question marks. Not so much semantically as stylistically. I would have opted for the ever-reliable <a class="external" href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Palatino">Palatino</a> font for the content of this site---and I almost did---but I was won over by <a class="external" href="http://www.josbuivenga.demon.nl/calluna.html">Calluna</a>, created by Jos Buivenga of the <a class="external" href="http://www.josbuivenga.demon.nl">exljbris Font Foundry</a>. It was the question mark that sold me. See? So very stroke-like and asymmetrical, yet not so much as a script. Not quite convinced on the "I" yet, but it is hardly intolerable. The <a class="external" href="http://kingdesk.com/projects/wp-typography/">wp-typography</a> plugin rounds out the content area with flush and hyphenated-when-needed character kerning.

<a class="external"
href="http://kottke.org/plus/type/silkscreen/">Silkscreen</a> 
makes an appearance in my customized right popup info box and other
marginalized areas on the site. Debated having anything on the right
at all, but thanks to the small pixel font, it stays somewhat readable
while still remaining unobtrusive.

For some of the more interactive features of this site, I owe several javascript code snippets and wordpress plugins. Javascript-wise, Steven Chipman's <a class="external" href="http://slayeroffice.com/code/imageCrossFade/xfade2.html">image cross fader</a> controls the title banner on the <a href="http://www.malloc47.com">home page</a>, Remy Sharp's <a class="external" href="http://remysharp.com/2007/05/18/add-twitter-to-your-blog-step-by-step/">twitter</a> javascript loader also appears the same page, Dunstan Orchard's <a class="external" href="http://www.1976design.com/blog/archive/2003/11/21/nice-titles/">modification</a> of Stuart Langridge's "<a class="external" href="http://www.kryogenix.org/code/browser/nicetitle/">nice title</a>" mouseover script pops up on some of my <a title="See?" href="http://www.malloc47.com/about">links</a>, and the code for the fading info box in the upper right corner was shamelessly adapted from the <a class="external" href="http://www.switchonthecode.com/tutorials/javascript-tutorial-simple-fade-animation">Switch On The Code</a> blog since I was too lazy to write it from scratch. Plugin-wise, I employ <a class="external" href="http://wordpress.org/extend/plugins/syntaxhighlighter/">SyntaxHighlighter Evolved</a>, <a class="external" href="http://kingdesk.com/projects/wp-typography/">wp-typography</a>, <a class="external" href="http://wordpress.org/extend/plugins/wp-latex/">WP LaTeX</a>, and <a class="external" href="http://wordpress.org/extend/plugins/wp-no-category-base/">WP No Category Base</a>, among many others.

There is much more left to appear on this site, as I continue to find ways to adapt Wordpress to do my bidding. Stay 

[1]: http://www.malloc47.com/research/ "You can find my CV here too."
[2]: http://www.facebook.com/malloc47
[3]: http://www.youtube.com/malloc47