---
layout: post
title: of soundtracks and extraterrestrials
source: http://mrpond47.wordpress.com/2010/01/18/of-soundtracks-and-extraterrestrials/
permalink: /blog/of-soundtracks-and-extraterrestrials/
---

It has always been the aliens.

Musically speaking, anyway. Fantasy has always had music, and music
[fantasy][1]. And occasionally aliens.

Whether our lovable characters are humming ditties across the foliage
of Middle-earth or our intrepid explorers attempt to decipher the
cacophonous intonations of extraterrestrial visitors, music has been
accompanying the adventure since before adventures were being put to
words.

Maybe we weren’t singing along, but we were being sung to. Maybe we
weren’t tapping to the beat, but the beat was there to be tapped.

So where did it go?

It seems that every major fantasy franchise eventually earns a
signature tune once it works its way up the ranks and onto the silver
screen. From the mysterious celesta stylings of John William’s
‘Hedwig’s Theme’ from *Harry Potter* to Patrick Doyle’s bombastic
‘Eragon,’ the bigger the budget, the brassier the bravura. Apparently,
without the written word, we still need someone to tell us when we
should be fearful of the sprawling armies before us or marvelling at
our wizard’s mysterious magics.

It might as well be the aliens.

Because who else is going to transport a 70-piece orchestra to the
far-off lands of Narnia purely for our listening pleasure? Before, our
characters were responsible for the words, our faithful authors
responsible for giving them the right meter and rhyme. Our
imaginations brought the orchestra. Or the fiddle. When our characters
chanted their lines, we didn’t get dramatic montages to keep our
attention.

Ah, progress. There are many upsides to having ubiquitous fantasy
soundtracks. Fantasy is bigger than life, and some of us like our
music imaginative. However, it can also be detached. Trying to sing
when the visuals don’t. Or make us laugh when the characters aren’t
funny.

But at its best, it’s the Greek chorus of the modern age, without
bludgeoning us with every internal dalliance of every character, while
preventing us from overlooking subtle emotions or expansive
vistas. Like a Greek chorus, our soundtracks even get to poke their
head in and be heard by our characters from time to time. But mostly,
the aliens play well out of earshot of the action. We wouldn’t want
those war drums distracting the archers, after all.

Music just fits better with fantasy. Really, when you’re watching
maniacal creatures attack our heroes on the battlefield, who’s going
to question whether that string run was played by a wandering minstrel
on the battlefield or by aliens watching from the heavens? We’ve
suspended quite a bit of disbelief by that point. Which is equally
valid for science fiction, where there truly is the distinct
possibility that the melody was inspired by extraterrestrial entities.

Say what you will about the quality of fantasy translated to film (and
there is much to be said, sadly), but arguing with the bold brass and
sweeping melodies of John Williams, James Newton Howard, Harry
Gregson-Williams, Howard Shore, and James Horner isn’t nearly as easy
a task. It’s music at its most grandiose; it *is* fantasy.  Sure,
fantasy may not be its own musical genre, but one need only feel the
swelling strings wash over the softly-repeating piano ostinato of
*Lady in the Water* to know that it is unique, it is immaculate, and
it is *ours*.

And whether it be the latest space opera or (yet another) Final
Fantasy, there’s likely much more music to come.

Unless, of course, the aliens decide to take some time off.

[1]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fantasia_on_a_Theme_of_Thomas_Tallis "You guessed it: Thomas Tallis"
