{:layout :post
 :title "10,000 Commits"
 :date "2014-07-28 00:00:00"}

Since finishing my dissertation, I decided to gather some metrics
across the related repositories. Pulling the raw number of commits
with (roughly) this:

```bash
find . -name .git
    | xargs -I {} git --git-dir={} log
                      --all
                      --author=$(whoami)
                      --pretty=format:"%H"
    | sort | uniq | wc -l
```

I realized that I'd crossed the 10,000 commit threshold right before
graduating. Which seemed appropriate.

While the Gladwellian [10,000 hours][1] heuristic (debatable as it may
be) for mastering a craft fits as a general cross-discipline measure,
I'd conjecture 10,000 commits is a more fitting measure for software
engineers. It's difficult to imagine reaching 10,000 commits without
having gone through a full software lifecycle, probably more than
once. And counting commits instead of hours has the advantage of each
being a visible, presumably atomic, and (lightly) documented bit of
work, where the prerequisite (actually using/understanding version
control) is a good indicator of investment in the craft. For those of
us who may have exceeded 10,000 hours tinkering with "programming"
before finishing high school, having a goal that requires the
discipline to document your progress may be more helpful than 10,000
unstructured or undocumented hours of hacking.

Particularly when completing a CS Ph.D., commits to research software,
open source patches, version controlled manuscripts, research
notebooks, etc.---when taken together---are rarely going to number
much less than 10,000 if you've truly produced enough work to
graduate.  Similarly, though I've not stayed in a junior software
developer role long enough to be promoted, crossing the 10,000
threshold sounds more than ample evidence of outgrowing the role.

When a software project hits 10,000 commits---no matter how ugly it
might be---it's easy to imagine it being fleshed-out and mature.  I'd
like to think engineers might be too.

[1]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Outliers_(book)
